---
title: Non-trivial invariants of rule permutation and cut-elimination in classical sequent calculus
excerpt: Slides of my talk at the ASL Logic Colloquium 2023 in Milan, Italy
category: talks
date: 20230609

links:
  - type: slides
    url: /writings/downloads/LC2023.pdf
---

|**Authors:** | Fabio Massaioli |
|**Language:**| English         |

These are the slides accompanying the talk I gave at the Logic Colloquium (ASL European
Summer Meeting) 2023 in Milan, Italy. The content of the talk originated from some [unpublished
notes](GS4invariants). I paste below for historical purposes the abstract that was accepted
by the program committee:

## Abstract

Cut-elimination procedures in classical sequent calculus are notoriously non-deterministic and
non-confluent, both in the original formulation by Gentzen and in later reformulations. It is natural
to ask whether those instances of non-confluence are superficial in nature, i.e. whether distinct
normal forms of the same derivation are in fact correlated in a non-trivial way. A famous counter-example
by Lafont purports to show that the answer is negative, that is, any notion of proof equivalence
compatible with classical cut-elimination must be a trivial one that identifies all proofs of the
same sequent. A long standing open question has been whether it is possible to work around Lafont's
example by natural and non-trivial adjustments of the calculus and/or of cut-reduction steps,
without resorting to symmetry-breaking techniques like polarization or embeddings into intuitionistic
or linear logic.

Working within the propositional fragment of GS4 — i.e. the one-sided variant of Kleene's
context-sharing style sequent system G4 — where parallel rule applications permute freely,
we show that the graph induced by axiom rules linking dual atom occurrences is preserved under
arbitrary rule permutations in cut-free proofs. We then refine the notion of axiom-induced graph
so as to extend the result to proofs with cuts. Finally, we exploit rule permutations to define
a global normalization procedure that preserves axiom-induced graphs, thus yielding a non-trivial
invariant of cut-elimination in GS4.

We conclude by discussing briefly the possibility of extending the result to context-splitting
style systems and first-order logic.
